Blog : FlowFuse AI Assistant: Let Your Engineers Build Automation, Not Write Code (#3511)
FlowFuse/website: src/blog/2025/07/flowfuse-ai-assistant-better-node-red-manufacturing.md

![FlowFuse AI Assistant generating a Node-RED function node to extract data from a CNC text report.](./images/function-ai.gif){data-zoomable}
_FlowFuse AI Assistant generating a Node-RED function node to extract data from a CNC text report._

## Creating Test Data in Seconds, Not Hours

Before connecting to live equipment, you need test data that looks real. Making it by hand is boring and wastes lots of time. You're copying rows, changing timestamps, tweaking numbers.

With AI Assistant, just ask: "Generate 20 machine records with machine_id, production_count, efficiency_percentage, downtime_minutes, and last_maintenance_date. Show realistic variations." Simple as that.

![FlowFuse AI Assistant generating test JSON data with multiple machine records including production counts and efficiency metrics](./images/json-ai.gif){data-zoomable}
_FlowFuse AI Assistant creating realistic test data for manufacturing dashboards—complete with machine IDs, production metrics, and maintenance dates._

## Building Custom Dashboards Without Web Development

> Standard dashboard widgets cover most UI needs, but manufacturing often demands more. Custom visualizations for specific KPIs require Vue.js templates. Matching components to your HMI design standards takes CSS expertise. Whether you're building new widgets or styling existing ones, you're suddenly in web development territory—far from where most automation engineers want to be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[FlowFuse Dashboard](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com) widgets cover most UI needs, but manufacturing can often demand more. Custom visualizations for specific KPIs can be build in Dashboard with the ["Template"](https://dashboard.flowfuse.com/nodes/widgets/ui-template) node, where developers can write their own Vue.js templates. 

Developing custom components to match your HMI design standards takes CSS expertise. Whether you're building new widgets or styling existing ones, you're suddenly in web development territory—far from where most automation engineers want to be.
```

> Take a Pareto chart for defect analysis—essential for quality teams but not available as a standard widget. Building it requires Vue.js knowledge, Chart.js integration, and responsive design skills.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a [Pareto Chart](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pareto_chart) for defect analysis as an example—essential for quality teams but not available as a standard Dashboard widget. Building it requires Vue.js knowledge, Chart.js integration, and responsive design skills.
```

> With AI Assistant, just describe what you need: "Create a Pareto chart widget showing defect counts as bars with a cumulative percentage line. Include the 80% threshold."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With FlowFuse's AI Assistant, just describe what you need:

> "Create a Pareto chart widget showing defect counts as bars with a cumulative percentage line. Include the 80% threshold."
```

![FlowFuse AI Assistant creating custom dashboard components and styling for manufacturing displays](./images/dashboard-ai.gif){data-zoomable}
_FlowFuse AI Assistant building both custom widgets and styling existing components for manufacturing dashboards._

> Or consider input boxes for operator data entry that look too modern. Your team prefers the familiar green LCD screens they've used for decades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or consider input boxes for operator data entry that look too modern. Your team prefers the familiar green LCD screens they've used for decades, you can ask FlowFuse Assistant:
```

> Tell AI Assistant: "Add CSS that makes the input with classes 'calculator' and 'text-input' look like an old green LCD calculator screen."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> "Add CSS that makes the input with classes 'calculator' and 'text-input' look like an old green LCD calculator screen."
```

![FlowFuse AI Assistant generating CSS to style input fields with green LCD calculator display appearance](./images/ai-css.gif){data-zoomable}
_AI Assistant creating CSS that transforms standard input boxes into retro LCD displays with glowing green text._

Whether creating new widgets or styling existing ones, AI Assistant handles the Vue.js and CSS complexity. You describe the outcome—it generates the code.

## Documenting Complex Flows Before Knowledge Walks Out

> Production flows evolve over years into complex systems. Hundreds of nodes, critical logic buried in functions, intricate routing between tabs. When knowledge walks out the door, new team members face weeks of detective work trying to understand what does what and why.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Production flows evolve over years into complex systems. Hundreds of nodes, critical logic buried in functions, intricate routing between tabs. When knowledge walks out the door, new team members can face weeks of detective work trying to understand flows and their colleague's work.
```

> AI Assistant's Flow Explainer solves this. Select any flow or group of nodes, click "Explain," and get instant documentation. It analyzes connections, reads function code, and generates clear explanations of what everything does and why.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse Assistant's Flow Explainer solves this. Select any flow or group of nodes, click "Explain," and get instant documentation. It analyzes connections, reads function code, and generates clear explanations of what everything does and why.
```

![FlowFuse AI Assistant explaining the purpose and behavior of a complex Node-RED flow in plain language.](./images/flow-expainer-ai.gif){data-zoomable}
_FlowFuse AI Assistant turning complex flows into clear documentation for easy knowledge transfer._

## Start Building Today

> AI Assistant is just one way FlowFuse helps manufacturing teams work faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FlowFuse Assistant is just one way FlowFuse helps manufacturing teams work faster.
```
